---
published: true
layout: words
category: words
title: "Selected reviews 2009 - 2013"
type: ""
lang: en
year: ""
front: false
teaser: ""
l10n: "/ru/words/2009-2013-reviews"
permalink: "/en/words/2009-2013-reviews"
---

Anton Batagov's return to the Moscow concert scene was a historic event: it has restored the social significance of music. The hall was jam-packed – people were sitting on window sills and even on stage, standing on the balcony. A lot of people were waiting outside with no chance to get in, and I was making my way through this crowd only by showing my _Vedomosti_ newspaper ID.

Anton Batagov hasn't played in Moscow for 16 years. He arrived safe and sound from the era when each concert of _Alternativa_ festival was like a draught of fresh air in the world of musical routine, and the NTV channel with Batagov's unforgettable music was a citadel of freedom. One of the listeners compared Batagov's recital to a spiritual practice: hundreds of people were listening to the holder of the truth who has kept silent for a long time.

No one has ever attempted to draw a bridge from Rachmaninoff to the minimalists over the heads of the modernists and the avant-garde.

The performance was truly splendid – with deep sound, like a view from the height of an eagle's flight, when the clarity of the whole makes every detail equally important.



_Pyotr Pospelov, Vedomosti, September 19, 2013_

***

Batagov performed his _Selected Letters of Sergei Rachmaninoff_ at the Rachmaninoff hall of the Moscow conservatory. This hall has never seen such a huge crowd. The Facebook comments looked like that: "I have realized what music is about!"… "The best music I've ever heard".

Next performance took place at the Moscow International House of music. Those who didn't succeed in getting into the Rachmaninoff hall came there along with a huge army of people who wanted to hear "the best music" once more… Ten minutes to the beginning. At least 500 people are standing outside in the wind attempting to get into the hall. The armed security officers (!) are trying to hold them back. The hall is overpacked.

What a miracle has happened?

The style of Batagov's recitals has nothing to do with the rules of classical concert halls. It's pitch dark in the hall, and it is allowed to sit everywhere, even on stage, on cushions for meditation. However, this atmosphere perfectly suits his mission. He works as a medium: "his" Rachmaninoff writes letters to Philip Glass, Arvo Part, Peter Gabriel, Vladimir Martynov, and other composers. What a complex game! His meditations are quiet and refined, like messages from the subtle world.

It would have been impossible not to play the "pure" Rachmaninoff encore - and he played his tragic Prelude in B minor, op. 32 No.10. Dead silence in the audience. But what kind of audience is it? Looked like many of the listeners have never heard a piano recital before! Strange? You bet. Serious? Yes. Extremely serious.

Is this a musical or a social phenomenon? A fashion or a trend? A riot?

Batagov has somehow managed to bring the atmosphere of confidence back to the classical concert hall. It had been lost long time ago. It's a tremendous victory no one has expected. It's a unique chance for classical music. The next one will not happen again soon. 

_Natalia Zimyanina, Novaya Gazeta, October 11, 2013_

***

Mr. Batagov is a composer and musician of rare skill and versatility. He has composed music for a surprising number of settings from chamber music to film music, from a computer opera to collaborations with Central Asia Buddhist leaders. These works are broadcast regularly on WNYC; they may vary in style, but not in quality: Mr.Batagov's works are substantial, well-constructed, and easily accessible.

Anton Batagov spent some time in New York in the early 1990s, but has been in Moscow since then. Even in a musical community as rich and crowded as New York's, Batagov had quickly carved his own niche; his return to Russia was our loss. I am delighted at the prospect of this unique musician returning to the United States.

_John Schaefer, WNYC_

***

Batagov is definitely one of the most interesting modern composers. His music transcends the structures of classical music to become something so much more. It sounds original and pure and distinctive, incorporating elements and techniques more normally heard in non-classical settings, which is precisely what makes his compositions so powerful and so singularly exciting, and causes his music to appeal to all fans of innovative and creative music making, as well as those of more traditional classical music. Rare is the music or composer that can bridge those two disparate groups, but Batagov is one of those rare examples. He is a unique voice in modern classical music, and one of the most original and exciting musicians composing and performing today.

_Andrew Connors, Aquarius Records (San Francisco)_

***

A surgical precision of his piano touch, deeply sensible sound that blooms in all colors under his fingers… Anton Batagov is a unique composer/performer who cannot be compared to anyone else because he is one of a kind.
Not only is he a wonderful pianist and composer of exceptional promise, he is an innovative thinker, a true intellectual, living deep within the creative world.

_Elena Dubinets, musicologist, Vice President of Artistic Planning | Seattle Symphony_

***

Batagov paints whole worlds on the piano

_Time Out New York_  

***

Batagov’s return to public performance is welcome news. Whether Batagov is providing his own, unorthodox view of the classics or exposing audiences to his own compositions, he surely shakes up our notion of what a solo piano recital can sound like.

_Zach Carstensen, The Gathering Note (Seattle)_

***

Anton Batagov's playing reaches the zone that Richter aims for.

_Allan Evans, musicologist (New York)_

***

I have never heard such a fantastic performance in my life.

_Teodor Currentzis, conductor (Moscow), from the interview for Russian edition of New York Times_

***

Two exceptional, magical, hypnotic nights of piano music performed by Anton Batagov

_Yekaterina Birukova, music critic, Openspace.ru (Moscow)_

***

Batagov's recital was a revelation.

_Alex Poots, Artistic Director of Manchester Int'l Festival and Park Avenue Armory NYC_